# Annotated Bibliography for the *Oyster Representations Project*

### Mitchell, Barbara. *The Waterman's Child*. Lolthrop, Lee, & Shepard Books, 1997.

Mitchell's book is a fictional account of three generations that have grown up as waterman on the Chesapeake Bay. The story traces this history through the perspective of the women in the families. The history opens with a description of abundance and prosperity but as the generations pass, the history reflects the effects of pollution and overfishing on the way of life of waterman families. In the end the narrator, which is the latest in the line of waterman's wives acknowledges that waterman's lives have become more difficult but expresses hope that the "good times" will return.

The story is interesting in that it reasonably accurately describes the degradation of the main fisheries of the Bay during the twentieth century but fails to examine or reflect on the causes of the changes that are affecting the families being described. The changes in the abundance and quality are presented as the whims of fate with the persistent hope that "good times" will return. By romanticizing over the complex but well documented causes of the changes in the system, the author creates a disconnect between the human actors and nature in the system.

For my project this book illustrates the ways that representations can affect the interpretation of ecological systems. Miller seems to be representing the system using Battistoni's model of nature-3, where nature is seen primarily as a source of "free gifts" for human wealth generation. In this case the Bay "provides" initially and is the source of wealth and stability for the family. As these gifts become lessened, the model does not allow for an examination of the interrelation between the human and non-human activities.

### Cruikshank, Julie. *Do Glaciers Listen*. UBC Press, 2015.

Cruikshank's book is an ethnographic account of the relationship between indigenous people and western colonists and glaciers in Alaska's Wrangell St. Elias mountains. The book uses interviews with indigenous people and written accounts to describe the different ways that people understood the activity of glaciers and how this activity related to human activity. I focused my reading on the first section of the book that describes the indigenous perspective because I was interested in examples of indigenous representations / worldviews of the non-human. Using accounts of oral history, Cruikshank describes how indigenous people in the region gave glaciers personal agency that would respond specifically and predictably to human activities, such as insults or violation of cooking prohibitions. These stories reveal a deep interrelationship between the indigenous populations and the glacier landscape that she shows is in contrast 19th and 20th century western ideas about pristine wilderness. Cruikshank argues that these differences in *representation* affect the way we manage and understand these landscapes.

This book provides examples of how different perspectives (*representations*) can affect understanding and in particular gives an example of an indigenous perspective and knowledge base. Cruikshank's argument that narratives frame our understanding (*representations*) of a place seems to apply to the Bay in the various ways that scientists, watermen, etc... can imagine the Bay and the oysters. The book also highlights the need to account for the knowledge structures of indigenous people, which can be erased by "western" narratives and representations.

### Anderson, Ben. "Cultural geography II: The force of representations". *Progress in Human Geography*, vol. 43, no. 3, 2019, pp. 1120 - 1132.

Anderson's paper describes a revision to the idea of a representation. He describes the criticism of representations being used as the structure of a system, which places too much emphasis on what representations "stand for" within the system. He revises this idea to show that representations are part of a system of relations within a system and are created by these relations. This shifts the focus from what representations "stand for" to what they "do" as part of this "relational configuration".

I like Anderson's re-framing of the idea or representations as part of a "relational configuration" because it seems to align well with ecological models of systems, in which the behavior of the system is an emergent property of its interacting aspects, representations being one part of that.

For my project, the idea of representations (in relation) forms that foundation of the way that I am thinking about the system. Representations of oysters as resources to be exploited emerge from and influence a largely extractive conception of nature and lead to an understanding of the Bay as a source of human wealth and prosperity. In contrast, representations of oysters as an integrated part of an ecosystem result in a different imaginary space, where the oysters have meaning beyond simply a source of human prosperity.

### Fair, Hannah and Matthew McMullen. "Toward a theory of nonhuman species-being". *Environmental Humanities*, 2023,  vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 195 - 214.

Fair and McMullen's paper explores the idea the non-human animals can be alienated from what Marx calls "species-being". In their analysis they expand Marx's concept of species-being, which states that our species-being is manifest is our ability to work for the well being of our community, to animals. Fair and McMullen assert that non-human animals can also have species-being when they are free to labor for their own well being. In this conception, like humans, non-human animals can be alienated from their species-being when their labor exploited for human capital production. This results in exploitation, suffering, and captivity. Fair and McMullen argue that framing non-human labor in the context of species-being means that the relationship between humans and non-human labor needs to focus on more that simply the alleviation of suffering during exploitation. Unlike Marx, who claims that the human ability to act with intention is what allows humans alone to have species-being, Fair and McMullen claim that our inability to ever know what species-being means to a non-human animal, means that we have to accept that they have it and that they can be alienated from it. In application, this idea raises vexing problems around how we can insure that animals are not alienated from their species-being while acknowledging that we cannot quantify it. Furthermore, Fair and McMullen show that livestock animals that are dependent on humans (they use the example of broiler chickens), present the problem of irrevocable alienation from species being because they have been altered to the point that they cannot achieve species-being.

Overall, the concept of non-human species-being allows for the articulation of a way that humans and non-humans can be in relation. I think there is a need for the analysis to be in dialog with ecological concepts, in particular the niche concept, since this would better describe the relations that the species is being alienated from. The idea that species-being is equal to flourishing seems to lack ecological rigor, since many species persist but fail to flourish in ecological systems in the absence of human-caused alienation. Thus it seems that the "society relationships" at the heart of Marx's concept of species-being would be for non-humans (and really humans, as well), the ecological relations defined by their niche.

For my project, this paper expands the boundaries of the way the we can imagine non-human lives. The specifics of oyster aquaculture are clearly alienating to the species-being of the oysters, especially the creation of triploid oysters for farms, that lack the capacity for reproduction and thus are completely isolated from their species-being.

### Krzywoszynska A. "Nonhuman labor and the making of resources". *Environmental Humanities*. 2020, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 227 - 249.

K-'s paper 
