# Annotated Bibliography for the *Oyster Representations Project*

### Anderson, Ben. "Cultural geography II: The force of representations". *Progress in Human Geography*, vol. 43, no. 3, 2019, pp. 1120 - 1132.

Anderson's paper describes a revision to the idea of a representation. He describes the criticism of representations being used as the structure of a system, which places too much emphasis on what representations "stand for" within the system. He revises this idea to show that representations are part of a system of relations within a system and are created by these relations. This shifts the focus from what representations "stand for" to what they "do" as part of this "relational configuration".

I like Anderson's re-framing of the idea or representations as part of a "relational configuration" because it seems to align well with ecological models of systems, in which the behavior of the system is an emergent property of its interacting aspects, representations being one part of that.

For my project, the idea of representations (in relation) forms that foundation of the way that I am thinking about the system. Representations of oysters as resources to be exploited emerge from and influence a largely extractive conception of nature and lead to an understanding of the Bay as a source of human wealth and prosperity. In contrast, representations of oysters as an integrated part of an ecosystem result in a different imaginary space, where the oysters have meaning beyond simply a source of human prosperity.

### Barron, Elizabeth, and Jaqueline Hess. “Non-Human Labour: The Work of Earth Others.” The Handbook of Diverse Economies, edited by J. K. Gibson-Graham and Kelly Dombroski, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020. 10.4337/9781788119962.00026.

Barron and Hess's paper seeks to develop a theory of non-human labor that is a critique of the ecosystem services view of non-humans. They begin by defining the labor of non-humans in terms of their biological and ecological requirements of nutrients and habitat, arguing that most of the labor of non-humans is devoted to finding, making, and modifying habitat and the production of tissue. They then use fungal systems to highlight the ways that organisms can contribute the products of their labor to other individuals outside of their species. They categorize these contributions as either "gifts", where one species used the products of the labor of the other species, or "in-kind" where the labor of the other species simply creates the conditions needed for the other species to survive and reproduce. These interactions can be reciprocal or if not, classified as "theft". The authors then show that humans typically conceptualize the labor of non-humans via the _ecosystem services_ model which views the labor of non-humans through the lens of gifted value to humans. The ecosystem services model attempts to define the value of these gifts in terms of the economic value they provide since neoliberal theory indicates that if the labor of non-humans can be included in market value, then the market should preserve it. In reality, the authors argue, that by focusing only on the value that non-human labor provides to humans, the market tends to incentivise the creation of simplified systems that focus on a narrow set of functions that are valued by humans. Barron and Hess propose the _econo-ecological system_ model, that emphasizes the interrelationship and interdependency of humans and non-humans. In this model, non-human labor has value outside of its value just for human needs but as the work that produces "nature".

Barron and Hess's paper largely supports the other literature that I have found on non-human labor. Their direct critique of ecosystem services is valuable since it places the ecological and labor theories in conversation. Their idea of an _econo-ecological_ system maps onto the way that I am thinking about how foundation species models can be used to understand the intersection of aquaculture and oyster restoration since it forwards the relational structure of the system rather than the services and value to humans.

### Battistoni, Alyssa, "Bringing in the Work of Nature: From Natural Capital to Hybrid Labor". *Political Theory*, vol. 45, no. 1, 2017, pp. 5 - 31.

In this paper Battistoni develops the idea of *hybrid labor*, which is a representation of both human and non--human labor for the purpose of shared creation of the life--sustaining aspects of the biosphere. Battistoni begins the development of these ideas with a critique of the concepts of natural capital and ecosystem services. She shows how these concepts developed in response to the inadequacy of the 18th and 19th century ideas that nature was a limitless source of materials for human activities. In the 20th century economists began to develop ways to integrate the limits of nature into the economic system created the concept of natural capital and ecosystem services, which draw direct connections between the nature and markets. Battistoni then goes on to show that the idea of natural capital is subject to critique on ethical grounds. She acknowledges that there are other avenues of critique but focuses on the ethical to show how each of the ethical avenues of critique are insufficient in some way. The main question that drives Battistoni's essay is the question of: "What are the effects of seeing something as capital? And what might result from seeing things otherwise?" [p. 10]. As she works through this question she draws on the work of *Deep Ecology* which proposes an exclusively intrinsic value for nature that isolates it from all economic an political activity and work of the *New Materialists* who seek to re-introduce nature into the political. She integrated these ethical framework with the ideas of *Marxist feminists* who have sought to show that domestic labor is unvalued by capitalist systems. Synthesizing the ideas of these schools of thought, Battistoni shows that the work of nature is "constituent" to the living foundation of human systems but similar to domestic/gestational labor, is unvalued by capitalist systems. Further, she shows that the concept of natural capital, by focusing on the products and services of the labor of nature robs nature of its political agency and intrinsic value. To address these issues, she develops the concept of *hybrid labor* which recognizes the labor of nature an adding value to economic systems, rather than just the outcome of that labor (i.e., natural capital and ecosystem services). By doing this, *hybrid labor* recognizes that non--human labor is both economic and political, as well as intrinsically valuable.

Battistoni's argument is strongly rooted in political theory and but does not connect to the ecological theory that supports much of the ecosystem services model. I think there is an opportunity to build off of her ideas to show that in addition to being insufficient from the perspective of political theory but also from the perspective of ecological theory. In particular her assertion that:

> Turning ecosystems into property requires that the be represented for the market as an array of individualized services that fails to adequately reflect their actual functioning or necessary independence; thus the complexity and relationality of what is supposedly being preserved is often lost as ecosystems are divided into packages of services&hellip; [p. 11]

It is this idea that provides the most potent condemnation of the use of ecosystem services to support the expansion of aquaculture in the Bay, and suggests that another ecological model --- which I argue should be the *Foundation Species* model --- is needed.

### Battistoni, Alyssa. “Labor of Life? Theorizing Labor with and against Nature.” Presentation at *Beyond Survival: Eco-Feminist Imaginings in Precarious Times*, University of Pennsylvania, February 26, 2021. YouTube video, 01:32:42. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NJYamkV0QgA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NJYamkV0QgA).

This presentation by Battistoni described how non-human labor can be understood within the context of a Marxist-feminist framework. Battistoni removes the concept of gender from the Marxist-feminist concept of labor to show that natural systems and "female" work are exploited in similar ways by capitalist systems. She begins this analysis by articulating three definitions of nature: Nature-1 is "biophysical nature" that is independent of human systems, Nature-2 is nature as a model for social or moral value or order. This is when nature is used as a justification (i.e., "unnatural" = "bad"), and Nature-3 is nature as a "free gift". According to Battistoni, this is how nature appears to capitalism - something that can be used and not paid for. Battistoni then adds an analysis of different types of labor where some labor is for the maintenance of life (Arent's "labor" and Marx's unproductive labor) and other labor produces surplus value for capital. She develops these ideas to show that nature and "biological" processes (e.g., gestation, child care) are unvalued by capitalist systems because they are for the maintenance of life but resist intensification and efficiency increases that allow them to produce surplus value.

For my project, the articulation of the three definitions of nature provide a useful way to frame the representations if of the Bay systems. The aquaculture and ecosystems services models clearly are based on the nature-3 definition. Furthermore, the foundation species model, like domestic labor, shows that the labor of the oysters to build a reef and facilitate a community, resists capitalist attempts at intensification. 

### Bommarco, Riccardo, et al. “Ecological Intensification: Harnessing Ecosystem Services for Food Security.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution, vol. 28, no. 4, Apr. 2013, pp. 230–38. 10.1016/j.tree.2012.10.012.

Bommarco et al. describe the way that _ecological intensification_ can be applied to agricultural systems to increase yield. In their analysis they partition ecosystem services into _direct services_ that are mostly **provisioning services** that provide needed resources to humans, and _indirect services_ that are mostly **regulating services** or **supporting services** that make the **provisioning services** possible. The difference between the actual yield (which is a form of **provisioning service**) and the attainable yield is called the _yield gap_ and represents what could be achieved through intensification. Via conventional intensification the yield gap is reduced by the application of chemical-based fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides, as well as through the physical manipulation of the soils and irrigation. This conventional intensification results in negative environmental outcomes and reduces the long term sustainability of yield. The authors propose that ecological intensification could result in a similar reduction in the yield gap as conventional intensification but without the negative outcomes. Ecological intensification is working with the soil organisms to increase the _indirect services_ and thereby increase the _direct services_. Bommarco et al. acknowledge that the goal of this is to maximize the yield and, although the practices associated with ecological intensification may positively align with conservation goals, conservation is not the goal and may not be maximized. To address this, the authors propose a "safe space" model where they argue there are interventions that would allow for the reduction of the yield gap and the maintenance of biodiversity.

For this project, this paper provides a good foundation for the view of nature as a provider of "free gifts". The goal of ecological intensification is to maximize the provisioning services of nature via a manipulation of the labor of the non-human members of the soil community. Although this may result in fewer negative consequences, those consequences are defined solely by their impact on humans. The labor of the soil community is being exploited for the benefit it provides to humans.  

### Cruikshank, Julie. *Do Glaciers Listen*. UBC Press, 2015.

Cruikshank's book is an ethnographic account of the relationship between indigenous people and western colonists and glaciers in Alaska's Wrangell St. Elias mountains. The book uses interviews with indigenous people and written accounts to describe the different ways that people understood the activity of glaciers and how this activity related to human activity. I focused my reading on the first section of the book that describes the indigenous perspective because I was interested in examples of indigenous representations / worldviews of the non-human. Using accounts of oral history, Cruikshank describes how indigenous people in the region gave glaciers personal agency that would respond specifically and predictably to human activities, such as insults or violation of cooking prohibitions. These stories reveal a deep interrelationship between the indigenous populations and the glacier landscape that she shows is in contrast 19th and 20th century western ideas about pristine wilderness. Cruikshank argues that these differences in *representation* affect the way we manage and understand these landscapes.

This book provides examples of how different perspectives (*representations*) can affect understanding and in particular gives an example of an indigenous perspective and knowledge base. Cruikshank's argument that narratives frame our understanding (*representations*) of a place seems to apply to the Bay in the various ways that scientists, watermen, etc... can imagine the Bay and the oysters. The book also highlights the need to account for the knowledge structures of indigenous people, which can be erased by "western" narratives and representations.

### Krzywoszynska A. "Nonhuman labor and the making of resources". *Environmental Humanities*. 2020, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 227 - 249.

K-'s paper describes the way that soil fertility is represented as labor in agricultural systems and how the process of soil fertility is being reimagined away from the idea of a human industrial or technological creation and toward an act of human facilitation of the labor of soil microbiota. The author interviews farmers to understand how they represent soil and soil fertility as they embrace the labor of soil microbiota. What K- found was that although the farmers see fertility as being created by the soil microbiota, they persist in a capitalist framework, where the labor of the soil microbiota is available for exploitation to meet human wealth generation needs. K- notes that because the biology of and therefore the labor of soil microbiota is unknowable to us, we will tend to alienate and exploit soil labor for our resource wealth building. This, according to K-, is evident in the emphasis on "improvement" of the soils for greater and greater fertility, which means greater and greater wealth production. Under this system the farmer is seen as the human labor which transforms the labor of the soil microbiota into capital. K- concludes that although the work of the soil microbiota in creating fertility is recognized, the fundamental representation of the system as a means of maximizing productivity and profit has not changed. 

This paper presents a powerful framework for understanding the labor of non-humans in agricultural and natural systems. There is clear evidence of "improvement" in the Bay oyster fishery (see Schulte 2017) and the idea that the oyster beds were seen as an extractable resource that could be improved. This model clearly continues with the shift from wild harvest to aquaculture. Although K- does not clearly do this, if we put her ideas in dialog with ideas about ecosystem services, we can see clear evidence that the labor of nature is exploited for human capital production, even under the guise of conservation. 

### Fair, Hannah and Matthew McMullen. "Toward a theory of nonhuman species-being". *Environmental Humanities*, 2023,  vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 195 - 214.

Fair and McMullen's paper explores the idea the non-human animals can be alienated from what Marx calls "species-being". In their analysis they expand Marx's concept of species-being, which states that our species-being is manifest is our ability to work for the well being of our community, to animals. Fair and McMullen assert that non-human animals can also have species-being when they are free to labor for their own well being. In this conception, like humans, non-human animals can be alienated from their species-being when their labor exploited for human capital production. This results in exploitation, suffering, and captivity. Fair and McMullen argue that framing non-human labor in the context of species-being means that the relationship between humans and non-human labor needs to focus on more that simply the alleviation of suffering during exploitation. Unlike Marx, who claims that the human ability to act with intention is what allows humans alone to have species-being, Fair and McMullen claim that our inability to ever know what species-being means to a non-human animal, means that we have to accept that they have it and that they can be alienated from it. In application, this idea raises vexing problems around how we can insure that animals are not alienated from their species-being while acknowledging that we cannot quantify it. Furthermore, Fair and McMullen show that livestock animals that are dependent on humans (they use the example of broiler chickens), present the problem of irrevocable alienation from species being because they have been altered to the point that they cannot achieve species-being.

Overall, the concept of non-human species-being allows for the articulation of a way that humans and non-humans can be in relation. I think there is a need for the analysis to be in dialog with ecological concepts, in particular the niche concept, since this would better describe the relations that the species is being alienated from. The idea that species-being is equal to flourishing seems to lack ecological rigor, since many species persist but fail to flourish in ecological systems in the absence of human-caused alienation. Thus it seems that the "society relationships" at the heart of Marx's concept of species-being would be for non-humans (and really humans, as well), the ecological relations defined by their niche.

For my project, this paper expands the boundaries of the way the we can imagine non-human lives. The specifics of oyster aquaculture are clearly alienating to the species-being of the oysters, especially the creation of triploid oysters for farms, that lack the capacity for reproduction and thus are completely isolated from their species-being.

### Mitchell, Barbara. *The Waterman's Child*. Lolthrop, Lee, & Shepard Books, 1997.

Mitchell's book is a fictional account of three generations that have grown up as waterman on the Chesapeake Bay. The story traces this history through the perspective of the women in the families. The history opens with a description of abundance and prosperity but as the generations pass, the history reflects the effects of pollution and overfishing on the way of life of waterman families. In the end the narrator, which is the latest in the line of waterman's wives acknowledges that waterman's lives have become more difficult but expresses hope that the "good times" will return.

The story is interesting in that it reasonably accurately describes the degradation of the main fisheries of the Bay during the twentieth century but fails to examine or reflect on the causes of the changes that are affecting the families being described. The changes in the abundance and quality are presented as the whims of fate with the persistent hope that "good times" will return. By romanticizing over the complex but well documented causes of the changes in the system, the author creates a disconnect between the human actors and nature in the system.

For my project this book illustrates the ways that representations can affect the interpretation of ecological systems. Miller seems to be representing the system using Battistoni's model of nature-3, where nature is seen primarily as a source of "free gifts" for human wealth generation. In this case the Bay "provides" initially and is the source of wealth and stability for the family. As these gifts become lessened, the model does not allow for an examination of the interrelation between the human and non-human activities.

### Richardson, Tanya, and Gisa Weszkalnys. “Introduction: Resource Materialities.” Anthropological Quarterly, vol. 87, no. 1, 2014, pp. 5–30.

Richardson and Weszkalnys present a model of understanding resources that they call _resource materialities_, in which resources are seen as neither material or social but a relationship between the two in which the resource retains some of its materiality. They emphasize that this idea places resources in relation with the human systems that create/use them. In their conception this relational structure is one in which the humans affect/change/create the resource but the resources also affects/changes/creates the human system in which it is used. Regardless of whether the resource is seen as a "free gift of nature" or created by the act of exploitation--that is, are resources present and only discovered and used, or are they made into resources by the _act_ of exploitation--it is the relationship between the resource and the human system that is most informative. According to Richardson and Weszkalnys, understanding resource materiality requires understanding: 
1. resource ontology
2. the ways in which the resource is "known" by its users
3. the infrastructure of extraction, transport, and processing
4. the way that the resource is experienced by people in relation to it

Richardson and Weszkalnys' paper highlights the importance of seeing resources in relation with the humans that use them but they still largely seem to be viewing the resources as inert and the relationship as human-centered. That is to say the resource is affected by the human either in the act of creation or in the act use and then the resource affects the human system that is using it. In this system the resource itself has no agency or activity. If we place these ideas in conversation with ideas about non-human labor, then we can see that for biological resources there is a need to account for the non-human labor associated with the resource. In the simplest case of the resource being a provisioning service, where the non-human labor of the system creates something for human use (e.g., food from the metabolic labor of a oyster), we would need to account for the relationship between the human and the non-human in the co-creation of the food. In a more complex system, where the resource is an indirect service, that is that the labor of non-humans creates the conditions necessary for the resource use (e.g., the metabolic labor of the phytoplankton that feed the oyster), we would need to account for the relationship of co-creation between humans and a more indirect and interconnected system. Finally, there is the labor of non-humans in a relational system that is independent from humans but upon which humans depend. 

These observations are not a criticism of Richardson and Weszkalnys' idea of resource materiality but rather an extension that is needed for biological systems. For the project, it seems that the main way that these ideas inform understanding is the way that the human act of _representing_ something as a resource places it into relation with human value systems. The application of the ecosystem services model is essentially the act of the making of resources. 

### Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. "Prologue. Autumn Aroma", The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins. New paperback printing, Princeton University Press, 2021.

In the prologue to her book, Tsing introduces the idea that the world is now defined by 'precarity', that has resulted from the loss of the guiding principles of modernity, namely the idea of limitless growth. She introduces the economy and ecology of the matsutake mushroom as an example of precarity, since it grow in the "wastes" of overharvested forests and its harvest is done largely by unorganized immigrants. Tsing argues that these ideas are a model of a way to see the relationships of the world in the wake of its post-industrial crises. The non-progress-based ecological and economic models of the matsatake ecosystem provide a framework for understanding a world that is in ruin. She argues that the progress-oriented world of globalized capitalism results in the *alienation* of humans and nonhumans, where she defines *alienation* to be the removal of humans and nonhumans from the context in which they developed and exist. For Tsing, it is this alienation that allows capitalists to reduce all things to items of exchange. She concludes the chapter with a description of how the current matsutake economic and ecological environment resulted from the developmental changes in Japan and around the world as an example of the way precarity defines the world.

For my project, the idea of *alienation* seems to map well to what is being done to oysters in aquaculture. The ecosystem services model incentivises alienation by viewing systems in terms of what they provide for humans, rather than within the context of the relational structure of the intact ecosystem.

### Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. "Chapter 3. Some Problems With Scale", The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins. New paperback printing, Princeton University Press, 2021.

In this chapter Tsing addresses the distinction between scalable and nonscalable systems. She identifies scalability as the ability to change scales without adjusting the conceptual framework, and shows that it is a valued trait in scientific and economic systems. A scalable research program can change scales without changing the research question, for example. What makes systems scalable is that they are not altered by the different relationships that occur across different scales. Tsing, using her ideas of _contaminated diversity_ -- which she defines as the diversity that results from the transformations that occur via relationships (i.e., contaminations) -- she shows that scalable systems emerge by ignoring the transformative relationships and only focusing on the "uncontaminated" aspects of the system. Tsing shows that the colonial plantation system is an example of scalability that has spread to the industrial era. By alienating the crops (sugar cane) and the labor (African slaves), the plantation owners were able to create a scalable system in which the parts were interchangeable. Tsing then shows that the matsutake ecological and economic system is an example of a non-scalable system because both the labor and the mushroom resist alienation. However, she also shows that the matsutake system came to being through the ruin that resulted from the scaleification of the North American forests by industrial forestry and the displacement of Southeast Asian populations from industrialized economies. 

For my project, Tsings ideas of scalability map well to the goals and practices of industrial aquaculture. Her assertion that nature is not scalable but must be made that way via alienation resonates with the distinctions between the ecosystem services model that isolates processes from their ecological context and invites intensification, and the foundation species model which forwards the relational structure of the system and is explicitly non-scalable in that it is highly density dependent and relationship dependent. Additionally, Tsings framework of scalability here seems to connect with Battistoni's ideas on the way that biological processes and the labor that they perform are overlooked by capitalist systems because they resist optimization and intensification, which seems to be her way of describing what Tsing calls scalability.  See also Krzywoszynska's work on the labor of soil biota and how soil systems too are vulnerable to ruin by attempts at making them scalable.


### Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. "Chapter 4. Working on the Edge", The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins. New paperback printing, Princeton University Press, 2021.

In this chapter, Tsing explains how the intersection of the, what she argues is the non-capitalist mushroom picking economy creates value for the capitalist system. She uses the concept of _translation_ in which one system is "drawn into" another. In her use of it, the act of making capital from the work of the non-capitalist mushroom pickers is an act of translation. The expands this point to suggest that the entire modern, supply-chain economy is the act of translation to the accumulation of wealth by capitalists. Tsing then explores how this economy based on translation interacts with nature by introducing the idea of _salvage accumulation_, where the capital is accumulated without control over the processes of production. That is, when the work of nature or non-capitalist workers is _translated_ into wealth accumulation by capitalists. The remainder of the chapters illustrates these ideas using historical and contemporary examples followed by a detailed illustration of how these ideas apply to the matsutake pickers, buyers, exporters, etc...

The concept of _salvage accumulation_ maps well onto the oyster economy of the Bay. The harvest of wild oysters is clearly the translation of wealth from a natural to a capitalist system via salvage accumulation. From Tsing's perspective, that is the anthropological perspective, it would be interesting to explore at what point the "salvage" takes place across the watermen, packers, etc... but that is outside the scope of what I am trying to do. In a sense the entire idea of ecosystem services is an explicit act of salvage accumulation, since what makes ecosystem services what they are, is the fact that the wealth accumulation that results from them is not based on the activities of the economic system. It then seems that the act of intensification that takes place via converting the natural ecology of the oysters to aquaculture would be an attempt to exert more control over the biological processes that are responsible for the wealth accumulation but at the expense of increased alienation. 
